# Solving Magic Squares

- Term Project Proposal
- Chris Barrick and Manuel Phun

We are attempting to generate and solve so called "magic squares" using a genetic algorithm. A magic square is an arrangement of distinct integers in an n by n grid such that each row, column, and diagonal sum to the same value. When n=3, there is only 1 magic square, excluding those created by rotation and reflection. When n=4, there are 880 different magic squares, and when n=5, there are 275,305,224 different magic squares. Because of the combinatorial explosion of the size of the search space, we believe that a genetic algorithm will fair better than deterministic search techniques for large n.

There are actually two different problems with magic squares. The first task is to generate a random square of a given size. In the context of a GA, this task requires searching the space of permutations for feasible magic squares. Additionally, we want to solve the problem of completing a partially filled square. This second task is like the first with additional constraints that certain numbers must appear in certain positions. For a deterministic search like constraint satisfaction, these additional constraints make the problem easier by reducing the search space. However, a naive genetic algorithm using only the operators we've learned in this course would still have to search the space of all permutations for feasible magic squares. The additional constraints make the problem harder in the context of a naive GA because the number of solutions is reduced without reducing the search space. However, we will explore custom operators that may allow us to reduce the search space much like what occurs in constraint satisfaction.

Along with the application, we are creating a general framework for evolutionary algorithms in the Go programming language. Go is a relatively new language (version 1.0 was released in 2012) being developed at Google and has seen a rapid adoption across the industry. We believe that it is important for the future of the language to have a high-quality package for evolutionary algorithms, and we believe we are capable of contributing to that cause. There is currently only one other genetic algorithm package for Go, called `go-galib`. However, the existing package is poorly documented and overly complex. Our goal here is to develop a well-dcoumented, simple, flexible API for implementing all varieties of evolutionary algorithms, with a particular focus on automatic parallelism.
